lxd: Support booting without EFI / OVMF (#16044)
canonical/lxd: doc/howto/instances_noefi.md

(instances-noefi)=

> # How to boot a VM without UEFI ('Concept')

Reviewer: Can we be consistent about using `EFI` vs `UEFI`? It seems like `EFI/efi` is used everywhere but here in this heading.

> In some cases it may be useful to boot virtual machines using the lighter-weight U-Boot firmware.

Author: Yes, done

> This has limited features compared to OVMF, but is a little faster and simpler, with a `GPL-v2`
> license instead of BSD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
U-Boot has limited features compared to OVMF, but is a little faster and simpler. It uses a `GPL-v2` license instead of BSD.
```

Reviewer: Can you name a couple of the most important limited features?
Faster and simpler in what way?

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion

```{admonition} Not for production use
:class: warning
This option has not been tested on real-world workloads and is not yet ready for production use. Use in testing or development environments only.
```

````

(instances-noefi-requirements)=
## Requirements

> - The `u-boot-qemu` package must be installed.

Author: Yes, host, thanks

- The instance must be a virtual machine, not a container

> - The instance must be restarted for the change to take effect.

Author: Yes, removed

(instances-noefi-configure)=
## Configure guest attachment

On the LXD host, run:

```bash
lxc config set <instance_name> boot.noefi=true
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The VM must then be restarted for the change to take effect.

```

The allowed values are:

- `true`: This LXD guest instance will boot with U-Boot instead of OVMF.
- `false`: Default if unset. LXD guest instances boot using OVMF.

To set this key on an instance that has already been created, see: {ref}`instances-configure-options`.

(instances-impact)=
## Impact of using `boot.noefi`

When the instance starts it prints a U-Boot banner, which allows you to recognize that the option
is enabled. To see this message, use `lxc start <instance> --console`.

> Here is an example, showing U-Boot starting up, locating Ubuntu on a `virtio-scsi` device and then
> starting it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below shows a VM booting with U-Boot, then locating Ubuntu on a `virtio-scsi` device and starting it.
```

> ```bash
>     $ lxc start me --console

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```{terminal}
:input: lxc start test-vm --console
````

    Scanning bootdev 'virtio-scsi#6.id0lun1.bootdev':
      0  efi          ready   scsi         f  virtio-scsi#6.id0lun1.boo /EFI/BOOT/BOOTX64.EFI
    ** Booting bootflow 'virtio-scsi#6.id0lun1.bootdev.part_f' with efi
           efi_run_image() Booting /\EFI\BOOT\BOOTX64.EFI
    EFI stub: Loaded initrd from LINUX_EFI_INITRD_MEDIA_GUID device path

    Starting kernel ...

    Timer summary in microseconds (8 records):
           Mark    Elapsed  Stage
              0          0  reset
        258,496    258,496  board_init_f
        264,987      6,491  board_init_r
        331,435     66,448  eth_common_init
        334,052      2,617  main_loop
        904,841    570,789  start_kernel

    Accumulated time:
                        46  dm_f
                        41  dm_r
    [    0.000000] Linux version 6.8.0-63-generic (buildd@lcy02-amd64-047) (x86_64-linux-gnu-gcc-13 (Ubuntu 13.3.0-6ubuntu2~24.04) 13.3.0, GNU ld (GNU Binutils for Ubuntu) 2.42) #66-Ubuntu SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Fri Jun 13 20:25:30 UTC 2025 (Ubuntu 6.8.0-63.66-generic 6.8.12)
```

(instances-noefi-caveats)=
## Caveats

This option should be considered a 'concept', not yet ready for production use. In particular:

> - no testing has been done on real-world workloads so there will be unforeseen problems

Reviewer: This should be mentioned much higher in the document, and highlighted. I've added a suggestion in the introduction for this.

Author: OK done

> - once U-Boot starts, it still boots using `EFI` protocols (U-Boot's `EFI_LOADER`)

Reviewer: Can we provide more details about this? It seems counterintuitive to call this the `no-efi` option then say that U-Boot is still using `EFI`, without further explanation. Also, I suggest moving such an explanation to the introduction and removing this Caveats section.
